Introduction
************

  You are reading about XEmacs, an incarnation of the advanced,
self-documenting, customizable, extensible real-time display editor
Emacs.  XEmacs provides many powerful display and user-interface
capabilities not found in other Emacsen and is mostly upwardly
compatible with GNU Emacs from the Free Software Foundation
(referred to as FSF Emacs in this manual).  XEmacs also
comes standard with a great number of useful packages.

  We say that XEmacs is a display editor because normally the text
being edited is visible on the screen and is updated automatically as you
type.  See Display.

  We call XEmacs a real-time editor because the display is updated very
frequently, usually after each character or pair of characters you
type.  This minimizes the amount of information you must keep in your
head as you edit.  See Basic Editing.

  We call XEmacs advanced because it provides facilities that go beyond
simple insertion and deletion: filling of text; automatic indentation of
programs; viewing two or more files at once; and dealing in terms of
characters, words, lines, sentences, paragraphs, and pages, as well as
expressions and comments in several different programming languages.  It is
much easier to type one command meaning "go to the end of the paragraph"
than to find that spot with simple cursor keys.

  Self-documenting means that at any time you can type a special
character, Control-h, to find out what your options are.  You can
also use C-h to find out what a command does, or to find all the
commands relevant to a topic.  See Help.

  Customizable means you can change the definitions of XEmacs
commands.  For example, if you use a programming language in
which comments start with `<**' and end with `**>', you can tell
the XEmacs comment manipulation commands to use those strings
(see Comments).  Another sort of customization is rearrangement of the
command set.  For example, you can set up the four basic cursor motion
commands (up, down, left and right) on keys in a diamond pattern on the
keyboard if you prefer.  See Customization.

  Extensible means you can go beyond simple customization and
write entirely new commands, programs in the Lisp language to be run by
XEmacs's own Lisp interpreter.  XEmacs is an "on-line extensible"
system: it is divided into many functions that call each other.  You can
redefine any function in the middle of an editing session and replace
any part of XEmacs without making a separate copy of all of XEmacs.  Most
of the editing commands of XEmacs are written in Lisp; the few
exceptions could have been written in Lisp but are written in C for
efficiency.  Only a programmer can write an extension to XEmacs, but anybody
can use it afterward.

