13.10.2 Footnote Styles
-----------------------

Info has two footnote styles, which determine where the text of the
footnote is located:

* In the `End' node style, all the footnotes for a single node
are placed at the end of that node.  The footnotes are separated from
the rest of the node by a line of dashes with the word
`Footnotes' within it.  Each footnote begins with an
`(n)' reference mark.

Here is an example of a single footnote in the end of node style:

 --------- Footnotes ---------

(1)  Here is a sample footnote.

* In the `Separate' node style, all the footnotes for a single
node are placed in an automatically constructed node of
their own.  In this style, a "footnote reference" follows
each `(n)' reference mark in the body of the
node.  The footnote reference is actually a cross reference
which you use to reach the footnote node.

The name of the node with the footnotes is constructed
by appending `-Footnotes' to the name of the node
that contains the footnotes. (Consequently, the footnotes'
node for the `Footnotes' node is
`Footnotes-Footnotes'!)  The footnotes' node has an
`Up' node pointer that leads back to its parent node.

Here is how the first footnote in this manual looks after being
formatted for Info in the separate node style:

File: texinfo.info  Node: Overview-Footnotes, Up: Overview

(1) The first syllable of "Texinfo" is pronounced like "speck", not
"hex". ...

A Texinfo file may be formatted into an Info file with either footnote
style.

Use the @footnotestyle command to specify an Info file's
footnote style.  Write this command at the beginning of a line followed
by an argument, either `end' for the end node style or
`separate' for the separate node style.

For example,

@footnotestyle end
or
@footnotestyle separate

Write an @footnotestyle command before or shortly after the
end-of-header line at the beginning of a Texinfo file.  (If you
include the @footnotestyle command between the start-of-header
and end-of-header lines, the region formatting commands will format
footnotes as specified.)

If you do not specify a footnote style, the formatting commands use
their default style.  Currently, texinfo-format-buffer and
texinfo-format-region use the `separate' style and
makeinfo uses the `end' style.

This chapter contains two footnotes.


