8.3.4 @xref with Four and Five Arguments
----------------------------------------

In a cross reference, a fourth argument specifies the name of another
Info file, different from the file in which the reference appears, and
a fifth argument specifies its title as a printed manual.

Remember that a comma or period must follow the closing brace of an
@xref command to terminate the cross reference.  In the
following examples, a clause follows a terminating comma.

The template is:

@xref{node-name, cross-reference-name, title-or-topic,
info-file-name, printed-manual-title}.

For example,

@xref{Electrical Effects, Lightning, Thunder and Lightning,
weather, An Introduction to Meteorology}, for details.

produces

*Note Lightning: (weather)Electrical Effects, for details.

The name of the Info file is enclosed in parentheses and precedes
the name of the node.

In a printed manual, the reference looks like this:

See section "Thunder and Lightning" in An Introduction to
Meteorology, for details.

The title of the printed manual is typeset in italics; and the
reference lacks a page number since TeX cannot know to which page a
reference refers when that reference is to another manual.

Often, you will leave out the second argument when you use the long
version of @xref.  In this case, the third argument, the topic
description, will be used as the cross reference name in Info.

The template looks like this:

@xref{node-name, , title-or-topic, info-file-name,
printed-manual-title}, for details.

which produces

*Note title-or-topic: (info-file-name)node-name, for details.

and

See section title-or-topic in printed-manual-title, for details.

For example,

@xref{Electrical Effects, , Thunder and Lightning,
weather, An Introduction to Meteorology}, for details.

produces

*Note Thunder and Lightning: (weather)Electrical Effects,
for details.

and

See section "Thunder and Lightning" in An Introduction to
Meteorology, for details.

On rare occasions, you may want to refer to another Info file that
is within a single printed manual--when multiple Texinfo files are
incorporated into the same TeX run but make separate Info files.
In this case, you need to specify only the fourth argument, and not
the fifth.

