20.1.3 Options for makeinfo
---------------------------

The makeinfo command takes a number of options.  Most often,
options are used to set the value of the fill column and specify the
footnote style.  Each command line option is a word preceded by
`--' or a letter preceded by `-'.  You can use abbreviations
for the long option names as long as they are unique.

For example, you could use the following shell command to create an Info
file for `bison.texinfo' in which each line is filled to only 68
columns:

makeinfo --fill-column=68 bison.texinfo

You can write two or more options in sequence, like this:

makeinfo --no-split --fill-column=70 ...

This would keep the Info file together as one possibly very long
file and would also set the fill column to 70.

The options are:

-D var
Cause the variable var to be defined.  This is equivalent to
@set var in the Texinfo file (see set clear value).

--commands-in-node-names
Allow @-commands in node names.  This is not recommended, as it
can probably never be implemented in TeX.  It also makes
makeinfo much slower.  Also, this option is ignored when
`--no-validate' is used.  See Pointer Validation, for more
details.

--docbook
Generate DocBook output rather than Info.  

--error-limit=limit
-e limit
Set the maximum number of errors that makeinfo will report
before exiting (on the assumption that continuing would be useless);
default 100.

--fill-column=width
-f width
Specify the maximum number of columns in a line; this is the right-hand
edge of a line.  Paragraphs that are filled will be filled to this
width.  (Filling is the process of breaking up and connecting lines so
that lines are the same length as or shorter than the number specified
as the fill column.  Lines are broken between words.) The default value
is 72.  Ignored with `--html'.

--footnote-style=style
-s style
Set the footnote style to style, either `end' for the end
node style (the default) or `separate' for the separate node style.
The value set by this option overrides the value set in a Texinfo file
by an @footnotestyle command (see Footnotes).  When the
footnote style is `separate', makeinfo makes a new node
containing the footnotes found in the current node.  When the footnote
style is `end', makeinfo places the footnote references at
the end of the current node.  Ignored with `--html'.

--force
-F
Ordinarily, if the input file has errors, the output files are not
created.  With this option, they are preserved.

--help
-h
Print a usage message listing all available options, then exit successfully.

--html
Generate HTML output rather than Info.  See makeinfo html.  By
default, the HTML output is split into one output file per source node,
and the split output is written into a subdirectory with the name of the
top-level info file.

-I dir
Append dir to the directory search list for finding files that
are included using the @include command.  By default,
makeinfo searches only the current directory.  If dir is
not given, the current directory `.' is appended.  Note that
dir can actually be a list of several directories separated by the
usual path separator character (`:' on Unix, `;' on
MS-DOS/MS-Windows).

--macro-expand=file
-E file
Output the Texinfo source with all the macros expanded to the named
file.  Normally, the results of macro expansion are used internally by
makeinfo and then discarded.  This option is used by
texi2dvi if you are using an old version of `texinfo.tex'
that does not support @macro.

--no-headers
For Info output, do not include menus or node separator lines in the
output.  This results in a simple plain text file that you can (for
example) send in email without complications, or include in a
distribution (as in an `INSTALL' file).

For HTML output, likewise omit menus.  And if `--no-split' is also
specified, do not include a navigation links at the top of each node
(these are never included in the default case of split output).
See makeinfo html.

In both cases, write to standard output by default (can still be
overridden by `-o').

--no-split
Suppress the splitting stage of makeinfo.  By default, large
output files (where the size is greater than 70k bytes) are split into
smaller subfiles.  For Info output, each one is approximately 50k bytes.
For HTML output, each file contains one node (see makeinfo html).

--no-pointer-validate
--no-validate
Suppress the pointer-validation phase of makeinfo.  This can also
be done with the @novalidate command (see Use TeX).  Normally, after a Texinfo file is processed, some consistency
checks are made to ensure that cross references can be resolved, etc.
See Pointer Validation.

--no-warn
Suppress warning messages (but not error messages).  You might
want this if the file you are creating has examples of Texinfo cross
references within it, and the nodes that are referenced do not actually
exist.

--number-sections
Output chapter, section, and appendix numbers as in printed manuals.

--no-number-footnotes
Suppress automatic footnote numbering.  By default, makeinfo
numbers each footnote sequentially in a single node, resetting the
current footnote number to 1 at the start of each node.

--output=file
-o file
Specify that the output should be directed to file and not to the
file name specified in the @setfilename command found in the
Texinfo source (see setfilename).  If file is `-', output
goes to standard output and `--no-split' is implied.  For split
HTML output, file is the name for the directory into which all
HTML nodes are written (see makeinfo html).

-P dir
Prepend dir to the directory search list for @include.
If dir is not given, the current directory `.' is prepended.
See `-I' for more details.

--paragraph-indent=indent
-p indent
Set the paragraph indentation style to indent.  The value set by
this option overrides the value set in a Texinfo file by an
@paragraphindent command (see paragraphindent).  The value
of indent is interpreted as follows:

`asis'
Preserve any existing indentation at the starts of paragraphs.

`0' or `none'
Delete any existing indentation.

num
Indent each paragraph by num spaces.

--reference-limit=limit
-r limit
Set the value of the number of references to a node that
makeinfo will make without reporting a warning.  If a node has more
than this number of references in it, makeinfo will make the
references but also report a warning.  The default is 1000.

-U var
Cause var to be undefined.  This is equivalent to
@clear var in the Texinfo file (see set clear value).

--verbose
Cause makeinfo to display messages saying what it is doing.
Normally, makeinfo only outputs messages if there are errors or
warnings.

--version
-V
Print the version number, then exit successfully.

--xml
Generate XML output rather than Info.  



