20.1.5 Running makeinfo inside Emacs
------------------------------------

You can run makeinfo in GNU Emacs Texinfo mode by using either the
makeinfo-region or the makeinfo-buffer commands.  In
Texinfo mode, the commands are bound to C-c C-m C-r and C-c
C-m C-b by default.

C-c C-m C-r
M-x makeinfo-region
Format the current region for Info.

C-c C-m C-b
M-x makeinfo-buffer
Format the current buffer for Info.

When you invoke either makeinfo-region or
makeinfo-buffer, Emacs prompts for a file name, offering the
name of the visited file as the default.  You can edit the default
file name in the minibuffer if you wish, before pressing <RET> to
start the makeinfo process.

The Emacs makeinfo-region and makeinfo-buffer commands
run the makeinfo program in a temporary shell buffer.  If
makeinfo finds any errors, Emacs displays the error messages in
the temporary buffer.

You can parse the error messages by typing C-x `
(next-error).  This causes Emacs to go to and position the
cursor on the line in the Texinfo source that makeinfo thinks
caused the error.  See (emacs)Compilation section `Running make or Compilers Generally' in The GNU Emacs Manual, for more
information about using the next-error command.

In addition, you can kill the shell in which the makeinfo
command is running or make the shell buffer display its most recent
output.

C-c C-m C-k
M-x makeinfo-kill-job
Kill the current running makeinfo job
(from makeinfo-region or makeinfo-buffer).

C-c C-m C-l
M-x makeinfo-recenter-output-buffer
Redisplay the makeinfo shell buffer to display its most recent
output.

(Note that the parallel commands for killing and recentering a TeX
job are C-c C-t C-k and C-c C-t C-l.  See Texinfo Mode Printing.)

You can specify options for makeinfo by setting the
makeinfo-options variable with either the M-x
edit-options or the M-x set-variable command, or by setting the
variable in your `.emacs' initialization file.

For example, you could write the following in your `.emacs' file:

(setq makeinfo-options
      "--paragraph-indent=0 --no-split
       --fill-column=70 --verbose")

For more information, see

(emacs)Edit Options section `Editing Variable Values' in The GNU Emacs Manual,

(emacs)Examining section `Examining and Setting Variables' in The GNU Emacs Manual,

(emacs)Init File section `Init File' in The GNU Emacs Manual, and

Options for makeinfo.

