2.4.2 Other Updating Commands
-----------------------------

In addition to the five major updating commands, Texinfo mode
possesses several less frequently used updating commands:

M-x texinfo-insert-node-lines
Insert @node lines before the @chapter,
@section, and other sectioning commands wherever they are
missing throughout a region in a Texinfo file.

With an argument (C-u as prefix argument, if interactive), the
texinfo-insert-node-lines command not only inserts
@node lines but also inserts the chapter or section titles as
the names of the corresponding nodes.  In addition, it inserts the
titles as node names in pre-existing @node lines that lack
names.  Since node names should be more concise than section or
chapter titles, you must manually edit node names so inserted.

For example, the following marks a whole buffer as a region and inserts
@node lines and titles throughout:

C-x h C-u M-x texinfo-insert-node-lines

This command inserts titles as node names in @node lines; the
texinfo-start-menu-description command (see Inserting Frequently Used Commands) inserts titles as descriptions in
menu entries, a different action.  However, in both cases, you need to
edit the inserted text.

M-x texinfo-multiple-files-update
Update nodes and menus in a document built from several separate files.
With C-u as a prefix argument, create and insert a master menu in
the outer file.  With a numeric prefix argument, such as C-u 2, first
update all the menus and all the `Next', `Previous', and `Up' pointers
of all the included files before creating and inserting a master menu in
the outer file.  The texinfo-multiple-files-update command is
described in the appendix on @include files.
See texinfo-multiple-files-update.

M-x texinfo-indent-menu-description
Indent every description in the menu following point to the specified
column.  You can use this command to give yourself more space for
descriptions.  With an argument (C-u as prefix argument, if
interactive), the texinfo-indent-menu-description command indents
every description in every menu in the region.  However, this command
does not indent the second and subsequent lines of a multi-line
description.

M-x texinfo-sequential-node-update
Insert the names of the nodes immediately following and preceding the
current node as the `Next' or `Previous' pointers regardless of those
nodes' hierarchical level.  This means that the `Next' node of a
subsection may well be the next chapter.  Sequentially ordered nodes are
useful for novels and other documents that you read through
sequentially.  (However, in Info, the g * command lets
you look through the file sequentially, so sequentially ordered nodes
are not strictly necessary.)  With an argument (prefix argument, if
interactive), the texinfo-sequential-node-update command
sequentially updates all the nodes in the region.

