3.6.2 @setchapternewpage:
-------------------------

In an officially bound book, text is usually printed on both sides of
the paper, chapters start on right-hand pages, and right-hand pages have
odd numbers.  But in short reports, text often is printed only on one
side of the paper.  Also in short reports, chapters sometimes do not
start on new pages, but are printed on the same page as the end of the
preceding chapter, after a small amount of vertical whitespace.

You can use the @setchapternewpage command with various
arguments to specify how TeX should start chapters and whether it
should format headers for printing on one or both sides of the paper
(single-sided or double-sided printing).

Write the @setchapternewpage command at the beginning of a
line followed by its argument.

For example, you would write the following to cause each chapter to
start on a fresh odd-numbered page:

@setchapternewpage odd

You can specify one of three alternatives with the
@setchapternewpage command:

@setchapternewpage off
Cause TeX to typeset a new chapter on the same page as the last
chapter, after skipping some vertical whitespace.  Also, cause TeX to
format page headers for single-sided printing.

@setchapternewpage on
Cause TeX to start new chapters on new pages and to format page
headers for single-sided printing.  This is the form most often used for
short reports or personal printing. This is the default.

@setchapternewpage odd
Cause TeX to start new chapters on new, odd-numbered pages
(right-handed pages) and to typeset for double-sided printing.  This is
the form most often used for books and manuals.

Texinfo does not have an @setchapternewpage even command,
because there is no printing tradition of starting chapters or books on
an even-numbered page.

If you don't like the default headers that @setchapternewpage
sets, you can explicit control them with the @headings command.
See The @headings Command.

At the beginning of a manual or book, pages are not numbered--for
example, the title and copyright pages of a book are not numbered.  By
convention, table of contents and frontmatter pages are numbered with
roman numerals and not in sequence with the rest of the document.

Since an Info file does not have pages, the @setchapternewpage
command has no effect on it.

We recommend not including any @setchapternewpage command in
your manual sources at all, since the desired output is not intrinsic to
the document.  For a particular hard copy run, if you don't want the
default option (no blank pages, same headers on all pages) use the
`--texinfo' option to texi2dvi to specify the output
you want.


