3.2.3 @setfilename: Set the output file name
--------------------------------------------

In order to serve as the primary input file for either makeinfo
or TeX, a Texinfo file must contain a line that looks like this:

@setfilename info-file-name

Write the @setfilename command at the beginning of a line and
follow it on the same line by the Info file name.  Do not write anything
else on the line; anything on the line after the command is considered
part of the file name, including what would otherwise be a
comment.

The Info formatting commands ignore everything written before the
@setfilename line, which is why the very first line of
the file (the \input line) does not show up in the output.

The @setfilename line specifies the name of the output file to
be generated.  This name must be different from the name of the Texinfo
file.  There are two conventions for choosing the name: you can either
remove the extension (such as `.texi') entirely from the input file
name, or, preferably, replace it with the `.info' extension.

Although an explicit `.info' extension is preferable, some
operating systems cannot handle long file names.  You can run into a
problem even when the file name you specify is itself short enough.
This occurs because the Info formatters split a long Info file into
short indirect subfiles, and name them by appending `-1',
`-2', ..., `-10', `-11', and so on, to the original
file name.  (See Tag and Split Files.)  The subfile name
`texinfo.info-10', for example, is too long for old systems with a
14-character limit on filenames; so the Info file name for this document
is `texinfo' rather than `texinfo.info'.  When makeinfo
is running on operating systems such as MS-DOS which impose severe
limits on file names, it may remove some characters from the original
file name to leave enough space for the subfile suffix, thus producing
files named `texin-10', `gcc.i12', etc.

When producing HTML output, makeinfo will replace any extension
with `html', or add `.html' if the given name has no
extension.

The @setfilename line produces no output when you typeset a
manual with TeX, but it is nevertheless essential: it opens the
index, cross-reference, and other auxiliary files used by Texinfo, and
also reads `texinfo.cnf' if that file is present on your system
(see Preparing for TeX).


