3.2.4 @settitle: Set the document title
---------------------------------------

In order to be made into a printed manual, a Texinfo file must contain
a line that looks like this:

@settitle title

Write the @settitle command at the beginning of a line and
follow it on the same line by the title.  This tells TeX the title to
use in a header or footer.  Do not write anything else on the line;
anything on the line after the command is considered part of the title,
including what would otherwise be a comment.

The @settitle command should precede everything that generates
actual output in TeX.

In the HTML file produced by makeinfo, title also serves
as the document `<title>' and the default document description in
the `<head>' part; see documentdescription, for how to change
that.

The title in the @settitle command does not affect the title as
it appears on the title page.  Thus, the two do not need not match
exactly.  A practice we recommend is to include the version or edition
number of the manual in the @settitle title; on the title page,
the version number generally appears as a @subtitle so it would
be omitted from the @title.  (See titlepage.)

Conventionally, when TeX formats a Texinfo file for double-sided
output, the title is printed in the left-hand (even-numbered) page
headings and the current chapter title is printed in the right-hand
(odd-numbered) page headings.  (TeX learns the title of each chapter
from each @chapter command.)  By default, no page footer is
printed.

Even if you are printing in a single-sided style, TeX looks for an
@settitle command line, in case you include the manual title
in the heading.

TeX prints page headings only for that text that comes after the
@end titlepage command in the Texinfo file, or that comes
after an @headings command that turns on headings.
(See The @headings Command, for more
information.)

You may, if you wish, create your own, customized headings and footings.
See Headings, for a detailed discussion of this.


