2 Invoking Info
***************


GNU Info accepts several options to control the initial node being
viewed, and to specify which directories to search for Info files.  Here
is a template showing an invocation of GNU Info from the shell:

info [option]... [menu-item...]

The program accepts the following options:

--apropos=string
Specify a string to search in every index of every Info file installed
on your system.  Info looks up the named string in all the indices
it can find, prints the results to standard output, and then exits.  If
you are not sure which Info file explains certain issues, this option is
your friend.  Note that if your system has a lot of Info files
installed, searching all of them might take some time.

You can invoke the apropos command from inside Info; see
Searching Commands.

--directory directory-path
-d directory-path
Prepend directory-path to the list of directory paths searched
when Info needs to find a file.  You may issue --directory
multiple times; once for each directory which contains Info files.  The
list of directories searched by Info is constructed from the value of
the environment variable INFOPATH; --directory causes the
named directory-path to be prepended to that list.  The value of
INFOPATH is a list of directories usually separated by a colon;
on MS-DOS/MS-Windows systems, the semicolon is used.  If you do not
define INFOPATH, Info uses a default path defined when Info was
built as the initial list of directories.  If the value of
INFOPATH ends with a colon (or semicolon on MS-DOS/MS-Windows),
the initial list of directories is constructed by appending the
build-time default to the value of INFOPATH.

--dribble=dribble-file
Specify a file where all user keystrokes will be recorded.  This file
can be used later to replay the same sequence of commands, see the
`--restore' option below.

--file filename
-f filename
Specify a particular Info file to visit.  By default, Info visits
the file dir; if you use this option, Info will start with
(filename)Top as the first file and node.

If filename is an absolute file name, or begins with `./' or
`../', Info looks for filename only in the directory of the
specified filename, and adds the directory of filename to
the value of INFOPATH.  In contrast, if filename is in the
form of a relative file name, but without the `./' or `../'
prefix, Info will only look for it in the directories specified in
INFOPATH.  In other words, Info does not treat file names
which lack `./' and `../' prefix as relative to the current
directory.

In every directory Info tries, if filename is not found, Info
looks for it with a number of known extensions of Info files(1).  For every
known extension, Info looks for a compressed file, if a regular file
isn't found.  Info supports files compressed with gzip,
bzip2, compress and yabba programs; it calls
gunzip, bunzip2, uncompress and unyabba,
accordingly, to decompress such files.  Compressed Info files are
assumed to have `.z', `.gz', `.bz2', `.Z', or
`.Y' extensions, possibly in addition to one of the known Info
files extensions(2).

--help
-h
Produces a relatively brief description of the available Info options.

--index-search string
After processing all command-line arguments, go to the index in the Info
file and search for index entries which matche string.  If such an
entry is found, the Info session begins with displaying the node pointed
to by the first matching index entry; press , to step through the
rest of the matching entries.  If no such entry exists, print `no
entries found' and exit with nonzero status.  This can be used from
another program as a way to provide online help, or as a quick way of
starting to read an Info file at a certain node when you don't know the
exact name of that node.

This command can also be invoked from inside Info; see Searching Commands.

--node nodename
-n nodename
Specify a particular node to visit in the initial file that Info
loads.  This is especially useful in conjunction with
--file(3).  You may specify --node multiple times; for
an interactive Info, each nodename is visited in its own window,
for a non-interactive Info (such as when --output is given) each
nodename is processed sequentially.

--output filename
-o filename
Specify filename as the name of a file to which to direct output.
Each node that Info visits will be output to filename instead of
interactively viewed.  A value of - for filename specifies
the standard output.

--raw-escapes
-R
Do not remove ANSI escape sequences from man pages.  Some versions of
Groff, the GNU document formatter, produce man pages with ANSI escape
sequences for bold, italics, and underlined characters, and for
colorized text.  By default, Info removes those escape sequences
before it displays the man page.  If your terminal supports these
escapes, use --raw-escapes to let the terminal handle them and
display the man pages with those attributes.

--restore=dribble-file
Read keystrokes from dribble-file, presumably recorded during
previous Info session (see the description of the `--dribble'
option above).  When the keystrokes in the files are all read, Info
reverts its input to the usual interactive operation.

--show-options
--usage
-O
This option causes Info to look for the node that describes how to
invoke the program and its command-line options, and begin the session
by displaying that node.  It is provided to make it easier to find the
most important usage information in a manual without the need to wade
through complex menu hierarchies.  The effect is similar to the
M-x goto-invocation command (see goto-invocation) from inside
Info.

--speech-friendly
-b
On MS-DOS/MS-Windows only, this option causes Info to use standard file
I/O functions for screen writes.  (By default, Info uses direct writes
to the video memory on these systems, for faster operation and colored
display support.)  This allows the speech synthesizers used by blind
persons to catch the output and convert it to audible speech.

--subnodes
This option only has meaning when given in conjunction with
--output.  It means to recursively output the nodes appearing in
the menus of each node being output.  Menu items which resolve to
external Info files are not output, and neither are menu items which are
members of an index.  Each node is only output once.

--version
Prints the version information of Info and exits.

--vi-keys
This option binds functions to keys differently, to emulate the key
bindings of vi and Less.  The default key bindings are generally
modeled after Emacs.
(See Custom Key Bindings,
for a more general way of altering GNU Info's key bindings.)

menu-item

Info treats its remaining arguments as the names of menu items.  The
first argument is a menu item in the initial node visited (generally
dir), the second argument is a menu item in the first argument's
node, etc.  You can easily move to the node of your choice by specifying
the menu names which describe the path to that node.  For example,

info emacs buffers

first selects the menu item `Emacs' in the node `(dir)Top',
and then selects the menu item `Buffers' in the node
`(emacs)Top'.

To avoid searching the `dir' files and just show some arbitrary
file, use `-f' and the filename, as in `info -f ./foo.info'.

The index search and the search for the node which describes program
invocation and command-line options begins after processing all
the command-line menu items.  Therefore, the Info file searched for the
index or the invocation node is the file where Info finds itself after
following all the menu items given on the command line.  This is so
`info emacs --show-options' does what you'd expect.



(1)

`.info', `-info', `/index', and `.inf'.

(2)
The MS-DOS version allows for the Info
extension, such as .inf, and the short compressed file
extensions, such as `.z' and `.gz', to be merged into a single
extension, since DOS doesn't allow more than a single dot in the
basename of a file.  Thus, on MS-DOS, if Info looks for `bison',
file names like `bison.igz' and `bison.inz' will be found and
decompressed by gunzip.

(3)
Of course, you can specify both the file and node
in a --node command; but don't forget to escape the open and
close parentheses and whitespace from the shell as in: info --node
"(emacs)Buffers".

